***One problem remains at my present level of understanding.  A lot of stuff
comes back into illustrator grouped in funny ways.

Yes, the basic problem seems to be that when you open any exported SVG in
Illustrator (not just from Walls), you wind up with a hierarchy of *groups*,
not sublayers, beneath a single layer named "Layer_1". In fact, if you
immediately save the file and open it again, the original SVG content will be
nested one level deeper, in a sublayer beneath Layer_1 named "Layer_1_1_". This
behavior will continue with successive savings and reopenings. Furthermore, any
sublayers you add (or groups you've converted to sublayers) will come back as
groups when the saved SVG is reopened. The only way to prevent this from
happening is to use the "Preserve Illustrator Editing Capabilities" option when
you're saving an SVG. This inserts a large chunk of proprietary-formatted,
binary data in the SVG -- something that allows Illustrator to roundtrip its
own SVG files by simply ignoring the SVG portion! No other program can safely
interpret or create such data, for example, to flag w2d_Walls as a sublayer
instead of a group.

***If I go to the layers menu I can select individual things via the select
circle on right side including down to individual objects.  If I go to the
drawing and click on something it selects all of the nested w2d walls  nested
layers.  The only way I have found to get "click-on" access to individual
objects is to run the "object|ungroup" command several (4) times.
This would be an acceptable workaround except that the first two times
separates out the walls layer and the walls sym layer and the last two
successively removes the walls  shp and then the nested layers dumping the
objects into the remaining higher level layers--the final time into layer 1.
I can now edit from the screen but the layer directory is a mess!!

Any reason you're not using the Direct Selection tool (white arrowhead) when you
click on an object? I'm not suggesting there isn't one, since I've got a long
ways to go before becoming skilled with Illustrator. So far, however, I've often
been able to leave the group arrangement as it is on the Layers palette and use
the Direct Selection tool instead of the Selection tool to work with individual
objects and groups of shift-selected objects on the artboard. I also use it to
move anchor pts, the ALT key toggling between individual and group selection
(all pts on a path).

Anyway, realizing this approach is hardly optimal I searched for a way to change
a group into a layer, thinking there had to be a simple command for this. The
best I could come up with is the following:

1) Double-click a high level "w2d" group in the Layers palette, for example,
w2d_Walls. (The parent must already be a layer.) This opens a small "Options"
dialog showing the group name. Use Right-click | Copy to save the name to the
clipboard, then Cancel the dialog.

2) While the group is still highlighted in the Layers palette, open the Layers
context menu by clicking on the tiny right-arrow near the top of the palette.
From the list of commands, select "Collect in New Layer". This will create a
new layer with a unique name, say "Layer_5", containing the group you want to
convert, w2d_Walls. Layer_5 also takes up the slot originally held by
w2d_Walls.

3) Select Layer_5 (all contained objects) by clicking the select circle to the
right of the name, then select Object | Ungroup. The objects and other groups
originally in w2d_Walls will now be Layer_5, but the group w2d_Walls will no
longer exist.

4) Finally, double-click Layer_5 and replace its name with the clipboard
contents, in this case "w2d_Walls". This makes w2d_Walls a true sublayer
(grayed on the Layers palette). We would then repeat these steps for both
w2d_Walls_sym and w2d_Walls_shp.

This looks messier than it really is -- just a few mouse clicks per layer. I'm
thinking of writing an AI plug-in to convert all w2d groups automatically, say,
whenever an SVG with "_w2d_" in the name is opened. Even then, it wouldn't have
to be done very often -- only when a raw SVG export is first brought into
Illustrator, or when a Walls-updated SVG is being brought back in. At other
times we would be maintaining an AI file while doing our drafting and
occasionally spinning off SVG files for use by Walls (and Walls2D). At least
that's what I've envisioned. :)

***Why are all the other layers under an outer layer 1?

I guess because there has to be at least one true layer in a document. Adobe
decided to treat all grouped elements in SVGs as groups, even when they
have names like "Layer_1".
