Ben,

Here are some notes on installation, a modified version of what's on the protected TSS page.

If you haven't done so, install the latest version of WallsMap avalable here:

http://www.texasspeleologicalsurvey.org/software/wallsmap/wallsmap.php

After running the setup, review the help file topic "Available Background imagery." It has links to image files you'll likely want your project to contain -- especially the DEM/DRG layers covering most Texas cave areas. Those links, in fact, are already set up for you in the project you'll be installing next. (More on this below.)

Close WallsMap if it's open. Then Copy TSS_Data_setup.exe, TSS_Maps.101, and TSS_Photos.101 from Dropbox to some other location (e.g., Desktop) and run the executable. You'll be prompted for the destination folder of the extracted data – that is, the parent of the three project folders: TSS_Data, TSS Maps, and TSS Photos. It must be a different location from where you installed the sample project that came with WallsMap. I suggest something like "C:\TSS."

As with previous releases, the project contains a new database snapshot, a read-only shapefile named TSS All Types_2015-03-25. At any time after you've made changes to any of the five category shapefiles (TSS Caves, TSS Shelters, etc.), WallsMap's Compare with other layers function can use it to prepare an update archive for submission to the database maintainer (currently Travis Scott and/or David McKenzie). If you're inclined to do this (which would be great!), you should read Submitting a Shapefile Update under Keeping the Database Current in the programs's online help.

When setup finishes, a project file named TSS_Data_2015-03-25.ntl will be installed in TSS_Data and automatically opened. Your previous project file, if any, will still be available and you may well want to continue using it provided you add TSS All Types_2015-03-25.shp as a layer. The difference is that the category shapefiles that you noramally edit
(TSS Caves, TSS Sinks and Cavities, etc.) will be replaced (overwritten) with new ones.

If, upon opening the project, WallsMap displays a message box warning you that a layer file couldn't be found, it's likely because you haven't installed some of the DEM/DRG images linked to the project. These are assumed to be in a folder named TSS_NTI alongside TSS_Data. If they're not there, just click the button that lets the program proceed without similar warnings. To avoid losing these image links, you can use the "Save as" feature to work with an incomplete version of the project. You'll find links to the DEM/DRG images (and also to hi-res orthoimagery) in the Help file under Available Background Imagery. There are also some linked geology files that you probably don't need.

Finally, you can review the sections "Getting Started" and Texas Speleological Survey Project."

Please let me know if you run into snags, have questions, or discover issues that need fixing.

Thanks and good luck!

--David




